---
authors:
- carmen
bio: My research interests include Biological and Ecological Sciences.
course:
  courses:
  
    
email: ""

organizations:
- name: University of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg
  url: ""
role: Honours student
social:
- icon: envelope
  icon_pack: fas
  link: '#contact'
- icon: twitter
  icon_pack: fab
  link: https://twitter.com/GeorgeCushen
- icon: google-scholar
  icon_pack: ai
  link: https://scholar.google.co.uk/citations?user=sIwtMXoAAAAJ
- icon: github
  icon_pack: fab
  link: https://github.com/gcushen
superuser: true
user_groups:
- Researchers
- Visitors
---

### Biotechnology and secondary metabolites in the 1980s  
 
Considering the biotechnology available today, the article, “Biotechnology puts the squeeze on plants” by Hilary MacQueen reinforces the extent at which biotechnology has advanced over the last few decades. MacQueen (1988) outlined some of the first biotechnological techniques that were used to extract useful substances from plant cells, whilst highlighting some of the problems that biotechnologists came across during that decade. Some of these problems included: 

1. Creating ideal cellular conditions, such as light, temperature, hormones etc. 
2. The stirring of cells often led to damaged or clumped cells which affected their production.
3. The desired product and quantity of the product not always being produced. If the desired product has high toxicity, cells need to be handled more carefully to ensure that the plant cells are not killed or experience lower production.  
4. Difficulties in producing primary and secondary metabolites as cellular congregation determines the metabolic product.  

Plant cellular metabolic pathway complexities make it difficult to extract and purify cells. Often chemical extraction is just sheer luck, which was the case for the historically important pigment, Shikonin (MacQueen, 1988). One of the greatest success stories of plant biotechnology involves the extracting of this pigment (MacQueen, 1988). Kanebo is a Japanese company which uses Shikonin in multiple lipsticks (MacQueen, 1988). Another important uses of plants includes traditional medicine to treat diseases like cancer (MacQueen, 1988). However, chemicals such as secondary metabolites often occur in very small quantities and so many plants must be harvested to produce sufficient amounts of the desired product (MacQueen, 1988). Plant secondary metabolite uses are broad and modern technologies are continuously adding to this list. So, the question is, will these technologies sustainably advance secondary metabolite applications beyond cosmetic uses? 
